https://www.ujam.com/tutorials/the-ultimate-guide-to-synthwave/

You have a coupon!

Go ahead an start shopping. Once you proceed to checkout, enter the following code into the coupon field (if not already done so):

Close

Skip to main content

Plug-ins

Plug-ins

UFX

UFX

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover UFX

ReverbThe Art-ificial Reverb Designer

Reverb

Beatmaker

Beatmaker

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Beatmaker

CozyLoFi Hip Hop Beats

Cozy

CircuitsAnalog Drum Machine Dreams

Circuits

BerserkDubstep Beats

Berserk

RicoReggaetón Rhythms

Rico

IdolInstant K-Pop Hits

Idol

GloryTrap? Pop? Both?

Glory

NemesisCyberpunk Beats

Nemesis

KandySweet & Edgy Drums

Kandy

HypeCreate Huge Festival Anthems

Hype

Vice’80s drums for the 21st century

Vice

VoidInstantly Create Full Drum & Bass Rhythms

Void

DopeStreet-credible Hip Hop tracks

Dope

HustleDrums for Pumping Bass Music Tracks

Hustle

EdenDrums for dance and EDM tracks

Eden

Bundle100% Style. 0% Sweat.

Bundle

Pianist

Pianist

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Pianist

VibeThe Electric Legend

Vibe

VogueThe Big-Stage Entertainer

Vogue

ScoreThe Grand Emotion

Score

BundleVOGUE | VIBE | SCORE

Bundle

Bassist

Bassist

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Bassist

SlapThe Wild Child

Slap

DandyThe Gentleman Bassist

Dandy

RoyalThe Session Pro

Royal

MellowThe Organic Acoustic

Mellow

RowdyThe Rough One

Rowdy

BundleLegendary Low End

Bundle

Usynth

Usynth

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Usynth

PixelRetro Gaming Adventures

Pixel

GlamThe pop powerhouse

Glam

DeluxeVibrant soul keys

Deluxe

CoreAll-purpose studio essentials

Core

CaramelButtery, sweet and warm

Caramel

EuphoriaElectronic dance staples

Euphoria

2080Future retro waves

2080

BundlePixel | Glam | Drive | Deluxe | Core | 2080 | Euphoria | Caramel

Bundle

Finisher

Finisher

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Finisher

BoostMaximum Energy Transitions

Boost

DynamoThe Magical Movement Machine

Dynamo

RetroVintage. Vibey. Cool.

Retro

FluxxThe Evil Genius of Creative FX

Fluxx

VoodooBlack Magic for Guitars

Voodoo

NeoInfinite Instant Inspiration

Neo

BundleCreative FX Extraordinaire

Bundle

Guitarist

Guitarist

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Guitarist

Silk 2Elegance in Every Note

Silk 2

Amber 2Strummed and Picked Steel String Acoustic

Amber 2

Sparkle 2Catchy electric rhythm guitar

Sparkle 2

CarbonThe Toughest Element

Carbon

Iron 2Rock Your Heart Out

Iron 2

BundleSound Better Faster!

Bundle

Drummer

Drummer

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Drummer

Legend‘70s drum champion

Legend

HotThe Drums on the Radio

Hot

BruteSmells like mean drumming

Brute

DeepSoulful Drums With a Big Heart

Deep

PhatFunk-a-Licious & Groovy

Phat

SolidGold-Standard Session Drummer

Solid

HeavyHard Hitting Drums

Heavy

BundleAuthentic pro drums

Bundle

MIDI Drum & Beat PackOver 30 new MIDI drum styles by UJAM

MIDI Drum & Beat Pack

Symphonic Elements

Symphonic Elements

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Symphonic Elements

BraaassThe Call to Adventure

Braaass

DrumsThe Primal Force

Drums

StriiiingsEvoke Emotions.

Striiiings

BundleMake anything epic!

Bundle

Groovemate

Groovemate

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Groovemate

OneGroovy percussion for popular styles

One

discover - white Shop All

Shop by Bundle

Shop by Bundle

discover - white Shop Alldiscover - white Discover Shop by Bundle

Full BundleOur collector's edition

Full Bundle

Store Special Offers App Tutorials Blog Support

Confirm your location We want to show you prices in your preferred currency, simply set the country you’re living in and choose the language to start shopping.

Austria (EUR) Belgium (EUR) Bulgaria (EUR) Cyprus (EUR) Czechia (CZK) Germany (EUR) Denmark (EUR) Estonia (EUR) Spain (EUR) Finland (EUR) France (EUR) Greece (EUR) Croatia (EUR) Hungary (EUR) Ireland (EUR) Italy (EUR) Lithuania (EUR) Luxembourg (EUR) Latvia (EUR) Malta (EUR) Netherlands (EUR) Poland (PLN) Portugal (EUR) Romania (EUR) Sweden (EUR) Slovenia (EUR) Slovakia (EUR) United Kingdom (GBP) United States (USD) Japan (JPY) China (CNY)

Afghanistan (USD) Albania (EUR) Algeria (USD) American Samoa (USD) Andorra (EUR) Angola (USD) Anguilla (USD) Antigua & Barbuda (USD) Argentina (USD) Armenia (USD) Aruba (USD) Australia (AUD) Bahamas (USD) Bahrain (USD) Bangladesh (USD) Barbados (USD) Belarus (USD) Belize (USD) Benin (USD) Bermuda (USD) Bhutan (USD) Bolivia (USD) Bosnia & Herzegovina (EUR) Botswana (USD) Brazil (BRL) British Indian Ocean Territory (USD) British Virgin Islands (USD) Brunei (USD) Burkina Faso (USD) Burundi (USD) Cambodia (USD) Cameroon (USD) Canada (CAD) Canary Islands (EUR) Cape Verde (USD) Caribbean Netherlands (USD) Cayman Islands (USD) Central African Republic (USD) Chad (USD) Chile (CLP) Christmas Island (AUD) Cocos (Keeling) Islands (AUD) Colombia (COP) Comoros (USD) Congo - Brazzaville (USD) Congo - Kinshasa (USD) Cook Islands (NZD) Costa Rica (USD) Cuba (USD) Curaçao (USD) Côte d’Ivoire (USD) Djibouti (USD) Dominica (USD) Dominican Republic (USD) Ecuador (USD) Egypt (USD) El Salvador (USD) Equatorial Guinea (USD) Eritrea (USD) Eswatini (USD) Ethiopia (USD) Falkland Islands (USD) Faroe Islands (USD) Fiji (USD) French Guiana (EUR) French Polynesia (USD) Gabon (USD) Gambia (USD) Georgia (EUR) Ghana (USD) Gibraltar (USD) Greenland (USD) Grenada (USD) Guadeloupe (EUR) Guam (USD) Guatemala (USD) Guernsey (GBP) Guinea (USD) Guinea-Bissau (USD) Guyana (USD) Haiti (USD) Honduras (USD) Hong Kong SAR China (HKD) Iceland (EUR) India (INR) Indonesia (USD) Iran (USD) Iraq (USD) Isle of Man (GBP) Israel (USD) Jamaica (USD) Jersey (GBP) Jordan (USD) Kazakhstan (USD) Kenya (USD) Kiribati (AUD) Kuwait (USD) Kyrgyzstan (USD) Laos (USD) Lebanon (USD) Lesotho (USD) Liberia (USD) Libya (USD) Liechtenstein (CHF) Macao SAR China (USD) Madagascar (USD) Malawi (USD) Malaysia (USD) Maldives (USD) Mali (USD) Marshall Islands (USD) Martinique (EUR) Mauritania (USD) Mauritius (USD) Mayotte (EUR) Mexico (MXN) Micronesia (USD) Moldova (USD) Monaco (EUR) Mongolia (USD) Montserrat (USD) Morocco (USD) Mozambique (USD) Myanmar (Burma) (USD) Namibia (USD) Nauru (AUD) Nepal (USD) New Caledonia (USD) New Zealand (NZD) Nicaragua (USD) Niger (USD) Nigeria (USD) Niue (NZD) Norfolk Island (AUD) North Korea (USD) North Macedonia (USD) Northern Mariana Islands (USD) Norway (EUR) Oman (USD) Pakistan (USD) Palau (USD) Palestinian Territories (USD) Panama (USD) Papua New Guinea (USD) Paraguay (USD) Peru (USD) Philippines (USD) Pitcairn Islands (NZD) Puerto Rico (USD) Qatar (USD) Russia (USD) Rwanda (USD) Réunion (EUR) Samoa (USD) San Marino (EUR) Saudi Arabia (USD) Senegal (USD) Seychelles (USD) Sierra Leone (USD) Singapore (SGD) Sint Maarten (USD) Solomon Islands (USD) Somalia (USD) South Africa (USD) South Korea (KRW) South Sudan (USD) Sri Lanka (USD) St. Barthélemy (EUR) St. Helena (USD) St. Kitts & Nevis (USD) St. Lucia (USD) St. Martin (EUR) St. Pierre & Miquelon (EUR) St. Vincent & Grenadines (USD) Sudan (USD) Suriname (USD) Svalbard & Jan Mayen (USD) Switzerland (CHF) Syria (USD) São Tomé & Príncipe (USD) Tajikistan (USD) Tanzania (USD) Thailand (USD) Timor-Leste (USD) Togo (USD) Tokelau (NZD) Tonga (USD) Trinidad & Tobago (USD) Tunisia (USD) Turkmenistan (USD) Turks & Caicos Islands (USD) Tuvalu (AUD) Türkiye (USD) U.S. Outlying Islands (USD) U.S. Virgin Islands (USD) Uganda (USD) Ukraine (USD) United Arab Emirates (USD) Uruguay (USD) Vanuatu (USD) Vatican City (EUR) Venezuela (USD) Vietnam (USD) Wallis & Futuna (USD) Western Sahara (USD) Yemen (USD) Zambia (USD) Zimbabwe (USD) Åland Islands (EUR) English (en) 日本語 (ja) 中文 (zh)

Confirm

Free Trial

Backstage

Backstage Logout

Backstage

Login

New here?

Sign up now

Cart

Search Query Cancel

We couldn’t find that...

Please try a new search or use our suggestions.

Ooops!

The search seems to be offline - please try again later...

Recent Searches

Popular Searches

Finisher

Drive Free

Beats

Striiiings

Suggested Searches

Top Results

Products

Tutorials & Blog

Blog

Tutorials

Other

Show all results for

The Ultimate Guide to SynthwaveHow the sounds of 80s new wave and modern day EDM merge into a cyberpunk masterpiece that transcends any decade. APRIL 25TH, 2020

Everything About The Future Genre From The Past What images come to mind when you hear the words sci-fi, 80s, and cyberpunk? Dark city alleyways, neon lights, and perhaps wingless flying cars speeding into the night? Does the mood feel dark, pensive, and foreboding? Once you have a clear set of images in your mind, think about what the perfect soundtrack for them would be. If you’ve watched movies like Blade Runner or Total Recall, you probably have a clear idea… Reviving that collection of feelings in contemporary electronic music is the core tenant of synthwave.

What is synthwave? Popular synthwave tracks and producers How to create the synthwave sound The most used instruments in synthwave

What is synthwave? If you’ve ever wondered what it would sound like to blend the iconic synths and percussion from the 1980s with the production quality of highly polished EDM (electronic dance music), you probably have a rough idea of this genre’s unique sound. Virtual drums are often used in lieu of classic drum machines, but in many cases producers still prefer to use analog tools and beat samples. Modern virtual drum software, combined with the analog sounds of more than 30 years ago, makes for a cross of styles and decades that presents an opportunity for producers to look back while still pushing the music industry forward.

Musical references and influencesPopular synthwave tracks and producers The movie Drive is one of the most popular examples of the genre in film, as well as Tron: Legacy. Modern Hollywood films often use synthwave in soundtracks for sci-fi movies that have strong 80s influences, as it’s the perfect bridge between retro aesthetic and a futuristic sound that simply wasn’t possible to achieve when new wave music was emerging in decades past. The music of groups like Daft Punk (Tron: Legacy), Electric Youth, and Kavinsky (“Nightcall,” the theme song of Drive) hearkens back to electropop film soundtracks from the 1980s. Though synthwave emerged in the first decade of the 2000s and seemingly peaked around 2010/2011, it’s recently had a strong resurgence in film and the world of underground EDM.

How to create the synthwave sound One of the most archetypal themes of synthwave is a 16th note repeated bass rhythm. This provides a strong anchor and can be achieved by using a sawtooth LFO (low-frequency oscillator) to modulate low pass filter cutoff. Many synthwave tracks fall under the category of 4 to the floor: the kick drum typically plays on every quarter note, and the snare triggers on beats 2 and 4. The sound of the kick can vary wildly, but it’s typically non-tonal (no pitch) and deep. The snares tend to have heavily gated reverb as was common in the 80s, but the body of the snare is much closer to modern-day EDM. UJAM’s new Beatmaker VICE is an excellent tool to quickly create a variety of retro beats perfect for the synthwave genre! A slightly wavering pitch is an integral part of the genre’s sound, which was present in a lot of 80s music. Between the use of magnetic tape and analog synths with physical wires and circuits, there’s a certain organic quality that’s difficult to replicate digitally. With time and a bit of playfulness, you’ll learn how to create synthwave by using some of the synths mentioned just above. This is particularly important to use on chord and melodic synths. One major distinction between synthwave and other varieties of EDM lies in production style: where most EDM tends to be heavily compressed and very bright, in synthwave the higher frequencies are often rolled off in favor of molding a more subdued timbre.

What are the most used analog and digital instruments in synthwave? One of the most flexible audio plugins for creating chords in this genre is Serum (Sylenth and Massive are also quite effective), largely due to the ability to create continual and random pitch changes with the Chaos modulator. The Chaos modular provides a distinctive advantage over conventional LFOs in that it’s constantly changing; that unpredictability goes a long way to transforming the cold precision of digital synths into the often more expressive analog world. That being said, there are a wide variety of synthesizers that are quite effective, and new ones are emerging constantly. Even if you have access to some of the best VST instruments, a tool like RC-20 Retro Color is invaluable to give any audio tracks a retro, degraded and distinctly 80s feel. But sometimes, even the best vst plugin for synthwave doesn’t quite match up to the classic hardware synthesizers that gave birth to 80s electro pop and the original roots of the genre. In the analog realm, some of the most iconic 80s synth sounds came directly from the Roland Jupiter-8. When you hear punchy bass lines, chorus effects and huge-sounding leads and chords in an 80s song, there’s a decent chance you’re hearing this classic beauty. For a guide to recreating some iconic 80s synth sounds perfect for synthwave, here’s an excellent article from MusicTech. For creating the perfect synthwave beats preloaded with detailed percussion samples, check out UJAM’s new Beatmaker VICE. Especially if you’re just getting started with producing in this genre, VICE will help you with beat making that fits naturally into the genre, and is the best Beatmaker for adding powerful kicks and snares with minimal effort. If you want to know how to produce beats at home without expensive equipment, you can try it here. There are a plethora of tools to get you started with this highly niche and nuanced genre, but the most important thing, as always, is to listen to as much and as often as you possibly can. Between YouTube mixes, Spotify playlists and endless other sources, there’s no shortage of synthwave to listen to, dissect, and recreate! VICE is based on and inspired by this playlist. If this is the kind of music you wanna create, VICE will make the beats for it.

About the Author Harry Lodes is a copywriter, marketing consultant and content writer for audio and ecommerce brands. He lives in the Philadelphia area, releasing Eastern/Western hybrid EDM under the artist name KAIRI hearkening back to his roots in Berklee College of Music.

Related Tutorials

The Ultimate Buyer’s Guide For Music Producers Workflow

How To Sync UJAM Plug-ins And Let Them Play With Each Other Basics

Related Stories

UJAM Releases Beatmaker VICE News

Share

Ready to time travel? Get the best tools for 80s, synthwave and retro beats.

0:00

0:00

Vice

’80s drums for the 21st century

69,00 USD

Buy

Add To Cart

0:00

0:00

Neo

Infinite Instant Inspiration

99,00 USD

Buy

Add To Cart

Beatmaker Bundle

100% Style. 0% Sweat.

299,00 USD

Buy

Add To Cart

Stay Up To DateSign up and we’ll send you an e-mail with product news and helpful stuff every now and then.

Please accept our Privacy Policy to store your E-Mail address and get our latest news.

Thanks for signing up to our newsletter! You‘ll be the first to know about UJAM news, sales and content.

Please check your e-mail address, it might be invalid.

Please accept our privacy policy.

Defy LimitsWe develop software solutions that enable people to create, consume and interact with music.

About us

Products

Finisher Guitarist Drummer Beatmaker Symphonic Elements Groovemate Bassist Usynth UFX

More

Store Trials App Blog Tutorials Affiliates

Company

About Careers Contact

Support

Helpdesk Submit a Request User Guides Refund Policy

image/svg+xml

English 日本語 中文

© 2024 UJAM Music Technology GmbH. All rights reserved. 3.2.3-1#7568ee9

Legal Information Cookie Settings Privacy

Download Dope

Your data

Download

Thank you

Enter your email to download Dope for free. No account or credit card needed, Dope will always be free.Get the free trial and use Dope for 30 days without limitations! Please enter your email address below to download.

Please check your e-mail address, it might be invalid.

Please send me emails with UJAM offers and news. I agree with the

Privacy Policy

and can unsubscribe from newsletters at any time.

I agree with the

Terms and Conditions.

Download for Mac or PC

Your data

Download

Thank you

Dope will run in Trial mode until authorized. In Trial mode, Dope will work without restrictions for 30 days. If you like Dope, please consider purchasing it in our shop.

Download

Looks like you don‘t have the UJAM App installed yet. Please download and install it first and then try again!

Download

Using Windows?

Download

Using Mac?

Your data

Download

Thank you

Thanks for downloading Thanks for downloading a free trial of Dope.

Got trouble installing it? Let us help you.

Click here

to get in touch with support.

Yey! You found an Easter Egg!

×

%%description%%

%%discount.percent%%% Discount Code

%%code%%

Click code & copy to clipboard

We also sent you an email with the code! If you need any further help please let us know!

Whoops, forgot to install the UJAM App?

×

The new UJAM App is a quick and easy way for you to install, authorize, and update all existing and new plug-ins. Spend more time making music and less time managing installers.

Download and install the App today and start making music faster, better and easier with UJAM!

macOS (Intel)

macOS (ARM64)

Using Windows?

Windows

Using Mac?