https://www.musicradar.com/news/the-beginners-guide-to-synthwave

Skip to main content

Open menu Close menu

Music Radar

MusicRadar The No.1 website for musicians

Search

Search MusicRadar

Guitars

Amps

Pedals

Drums

Synths

Software

Pianos

Controllers

Recording

Buyer’s guides

Live

DJ

Advice

Acoustic

Bass

About Us

More

Reviews

Magazines

Computer Music Electronic Musician Future Music Keyboard Magazine Guitarist Guitar Techniques Total Guitar Bass Player

More Classic rock guitar riffs for beginners 10 years of Korg Volcas - ranked How to make an AI cover song 30 beautiful acoustic guitar chords 86000+ free music samples

When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.

News

The beginner’s guide to: synthwave

By Future Music

( emusician, Computer Music ) published 12 May 2021

The brooding electronic music microgenre that harks back to the ‘80s

(Image credit: Roland)

Music consumption in the 21st century is unrecognisable to previous generations, with huge shifts in the spaces we associate with musical styles and their organic creation.

In the ’80s, the places you’d find electronic music were clearly defined: clubs, radio, MTV or other music television shows, record shops and maybe the music press. In 2021, you’re just as likely to discover music via video games, movie soundtracks, streaming TV series or social media platforms. One perfect example of this shift in emphasis comes in the form of synthwave, the loosely defined genre that emerged in the first decade of this century, stylistically drawing on ’80s synth-pop, updated with modern production values. This distinctly retro microgenre emerged not via a particular club scene or an influential DJ, but from an organic coalescence of smaller trends, some online and some in other cultural spaces.

A neat starting point for the synthwave movement is the release of Grand Theft Auto: Vice City, in 2002. It wasn’t by any means the first video game to feature licensed music in its soundtrack, but the extensive choice of radio stations on offer was a phenomenon in itself. 

Cruising around a fictionalised 1980s Miami in a Lamborghini Countach-inspired Infernus supercar, listening to the likes of A Flock Of Seagulls, The Human League and Gary Numan on the in-game Wave 103 radio station, helped define a retro aesthetic that chimed with emerging trends for retro dance music. Riding the wave Perhaps the defining moment for synthwave came in 2011, with the release of Drive, Nicolas Winding Refn’s action drama movie starring Ryan Gosling as a stuntman and getaway driver. The movie’s soundtrack was a huge success, including tracks by Kavinsky, College, Johnny Jewel (as part of Desire and Chromatics) and composer Cliff Martinez. Sonically, it was a distinctly retro take on synth-pop, updated in a knowing, arch style. Since then, the synthwave baton has been picked up by the likes of The Midnight, FM-84, Timecop1983, Ollie Wride, Violet Days, Savior Adore, Essenger, Gilligan Moss and Primo The Alien. Much of the appeal of synthwave comes from the fact that it’s electronic music that’s defiantly removed from club culture. Sure, there’s a crossover with acts like Justice and Kavinsky, who straddled both worlds, but a lot of synthwave is song-driven and lower tempo than similar genres like electro house or nu-disco. As such, synthwave’s relevance is unusual in electronic music terms. You’d be hard pressed to name a high-profile synthwave club night or even a major synthwave label that has crossed over from cult status to become a household name in broader music circles.  The wider retro culture and visual aesthetic of synthwave feels almost as important as the music itself.Instead, it’s a genre that shows its relevance and impact in other ways. Take, for instance, the soundtrack to Netflix’s smash hit Stranger Things series, which premiered in 2016. As part of the retro styling of the 1980s-set show, the soundtrack featured original music by Michael Stein and Kyle Dixon of Survive, alongside period-correct music by artists from Tangerine Dream to New Order. The wider retro culture and visual aesthetic of synthwave feels almost as important as the music itself. It even spawned its own term, Outrun, a reference to the 1986 video game Out Run, another title in which driving and musical aesthetics went hand in hand, chiming nicely with Vice City and Drive. A 2019 documentary, The Rise Of The Synths, explored the phenomenon. Is synthwave still relevant? Consider the success of The Weeknd’s mega hit Blinding Lights, released in November of 2019 but still, at the time of writing, a fixture in the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100 chart. More than just a passing fad, synthwave can stake a genuine claim to be a lasting cultural phenomenon.  3 essential synthwave production tools Arturia V Collection 8

(Image credit: Arturia)Synthwave’s retro production aesthetic relies heavily, as the name suggests, on vintage synths. That’s an unavoidably expensive way to make music these days, as prices of classic instruments have skyrocketed in recent years. For most of us, software emulations of iconic models are the more affordable option. You can take your pick from hundreds of instruments in the plugin world, but if you want the most comprehensive choice of high-quality emulations, Arturia’s V Collection 8 is the obvious starting point, offering a total of 28 instruments in a €599 bundle. Vintage drum samples from Loopcloud or Splice Drums are easily handled using samples, blending acoustic hits with vintage drums and harder-hitting modern sounds to give character and impact. Most DAWs include a decent selection these days, but if you want more options, subscription platforms like Loopcloud and Splice will give you plenty of royalty-free sounds to choose from.  Korg Minilogue

(Image credit: Future)Vintage analogue synths are usually expensive and sometimes unreliable, but there are modern options, too. Korg’s Minilogue is one of the most accessible, affordable polyphonic synths, offering four voices of true analogue power at around £430. It might not offer the prestige of a classic all-rounder like a Roland Juno-106, but it has a similar ability to turn its hand to most sounds, from fat monophonic basslines to delicate arpeggios, silky pads and beefy leads.

Get the MusicRadar NewsletterWant all the hottest music and gear news, reviews, deals, features and more, direct to your inbox? Sign up here.

Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors

By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.

Future Music Social Links Navigation

Future Music is the number one magazine for today's producers. Packed with technique and technology we'll help you make great new music. All-access artist interviews, in-depth gear reviews, essential production tutorials and much more. Every marvellous monthly edition features reliable reviews of the latest and greatest hardware and software technology and techniques, unparalleled advice, in-depth interviews, sensational free samples and so much more to improve the experience and outcome of your music-making.

All-access artist interviews, in-depth gear reviews, essential production tutorials and much more. Get the latest issue now!

More Info

More about tech

TAL's latest plugin emulates the '80s synth behind the classic rave hoover sound, Roland's Alpha Juno 2 How to work with piano in your DAW

Latest

“I’m just going to play my mandolin, all right?”: Mumford & Sons fan Noah Kahan says he doesn’t care about being cool and weighs in on the Universal Music vs TikTok debate See more latest ►

Most Popular

Can a $249 preamp/drive pedal and a few commonly found stompboxes nail the Dumble amp tones of classic SRV, Eric Johnson and John Mayer tracks?By Jonathan Horsley16 February 2024

Manson Guitar Works launches the super-premium MB GEO Mask Edition, “an identical replica of Bellamy’s Will Of The People stage guitar” right down to the Sustainiac and multi-angled metal finishBy Jonathan Horsley16 February 2024

“A testament to the enduring legacy of the shred sleds of the 80s, reborn for today’s generation”: Ready Player One! Kramer shows some love for 8-Bit arcade games with the NightSwan Pixel HeartsBy Jonathan Horsley16 February 2024

"Love U GarageBand": PinkPantheress responds to being named Producer of the Year at the 2024 Billboard Women in Music AwardsBy Ben Rogerson16 February 2024

How Laurie Anderson made the experimental classic O Superman: "The lyrics are a one-sided conversation, like a prayer to God. I wanted it to be like a Greek chorus – not just one voice – so I used a vocoder"By Vincent Joseph16 February 2024

Aaron Horn: "My dad banned me from all the studios as a little kid. Every kid just wants to hit a load of buttons, don’t they?"By Andy Price16 February 2024

Fender's Ultra range gets a wild makeover - exclusive to Guitar Center, the new Tiger's Eye finish looks to be a roaring successBy Daryl Robertson16 February 2024

How to master wavetable synthesis: "From the PPG Wave through to hit plugins like Massive and Serum, this is a synthesis method that has stood the test of time "By Future Music16 February 2024

“I don’t know why everybody doesn’t make poly aftertouch synths - it’s pretty stupid. In the ‘70s they did it right”: Beyoncé, The Weeknd and Kanye West collaborator Mike Dean cuts loose on his CS-80, Jupiter-8 and Oberheim Four VoiceBy Ben Rogerson16 February 2024

“When you hear that rock and roll thing, it really kind of comes from her”: A lost and previously unheard live recording of rock ’n’ roll pioneer Sister Rosetta Tharpe is being released for Record Store DayBy Jonathan Horsley16 February 2024

How a lightning storm fried Richie Hawtin's gear and created the sound of F.U.S.E.'s Dimension Intrusion: "My equipment glowed and then shut down. After that, there was something wrong with my Wavestation; it was even more distorted"By Roy Spencer16 February 2024

MOST POPULARMOST SHARED

1 How to master your synths: "If you really want to get to know a synth, the best thing you can do is read the manual, test out each element and get a feel for how each feature affects the sound"

2 Gibson just quietly unveiled 11 new guitars

3 Billy Joel explains why he wouldn’t ask Paul McCartney to be in his supergroup, but says he would call Sting, Don Henley and John Mayer

4 “It is a tribute to the enduring legacy of tube amplifier culture”: Would you buy a $40,000 guitar amp? Because Jens Ritter has just made one and the Encore is a Fender/Dumble inspired work of art

5 Fender's Ultra range gets a wild makeover - exclusive to Guitar Center, the new Tiger's Eye finish looks to be a roaring success

1 Spector NS Pulse II 5 review

2 “In a heartbeat, absolutely," says Lindsey Buckingham about whether he'd return to Fleetwood Mac to 'close' their story

3 Aaron Horn: "My dad banned me from all the studios as a little kid. Every kid just wants to hit a load of buttons, don’t they?"

4 Gibson just quietly unveiled 11 new guitars

5 Billy Joel explains why he wouldn’t ask Paul McCartney to be in his supergroup, but says he would call Sting, Don Henley and John Mayer

MusicRadar is part of Future plc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.

About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookies policy Advertise with us Accessibility Statement Careers

© Future Publishing Limited Quay House, The Ambury, Bath BA1 1UA. All rights reserved. England and Wales company registration number 2008885.