https://www.loudersound.com/features/10-essential-synthwave-albums

Skip to main content

Louder

CLASSIC ROCK METAL HAMMER PROG ONE LOUDER

Open menu Close menu

Louder The world’s biggest and best metal magazine

Search

Search Louder

Subscribe

Music Magazines

Why subscribe?

Mother's Day Special: Get a £10 VEX gift card when you subscribe! Every issue delivered direct to your door Or treat someone you love to the gift that keeps on giving!

From£5

View

NEWS

FEATURES

REVIEWS

Magazine

NEWSLETTER

STORE

Trending Best new metal songs The story of Murderdolls' reunion Inside SOAD's lost album The rise of Lorna Shore

When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.

Features

Metal Hammer

10 essential Synthwave albums

By Dom Lawson

( Metal Hammer ) published 8 June 2020

Synthwave is dragging metalheads onto the dancefloor. From GosT to Carpenter Brut, here are the 10 albums you need to own

(Image credit: Press)

Inspired by ‘80s movie and videogame soundtracks and pioneering electronic musicians like Tangerine Dream, Jean-Michel Jarre and director John Carpenter, synthwave has become a major force over the last decade. Powered by old school synthesizers and thunderous, sequenced beats, laptop-wielding ultra-nerds like Pertubator and Carpenter Brut have been conjuring new ways to be heavy and subversive, while simultaneously dragging metalheads onto the dancefloor. Just in case you’ve missed the rise and rise of bleepy ‘n’ bolshy retro-futurism, here are ten of the best synthwave albums released to date. Your electric dreams start here, kids.

Cliff Martinez - Drive OST (2011) The most pivotal moment in the emergence of synthwave as an recognisable sound, the Drive soundtrack arguably had more cultural impact than the Nicolas Winding Refn-directed movie itself. Steeped in the skittering beats, pulsing electronics and keening melodies of John Carpenter, Jean-Michel Jarre, Giorgio Moroder and Tangerine Dream, former Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Cliff Martinez’s evocative musical vignettes kick-started a giant wave of nostalgia for the golden age of synthesizer soundtracks. The film was pretty cool, too.

Perturbator – Terror 404 (2012) Metal’s favourite synthwave artist was harder, darker and more deranged than his contemporaries from the very start. It would be 2016’s opulent The Uncanny Valley that would confirm his rise to prominence, but the Frenchman’s debut was every bit as monstrous. Sinister and brutal in equal measure, tracks like Savage Street and the brilliantly named John Holmes VHS Nightclub re-imagined early synthwave’s misty-eyed retro ethos into something louder, harder and proudly dark as fuck.

Kavinsky – OutRun (2013) Synthwave was thriving long before the rock and metal scenes started paying attention, and Kavinsky was one of the genre’s early breakout stars. It’s not hard to hear why: OutRun feels like a holistic manifesto for the retrowave era. With countless great tunes and diverse array of styles and sonic tricks, from Suburbia’s futuristic hip-hop to the psychedelic synth-pop of Nightcall (also featured on Drive’s OST), it still stands out at as a seminal, movement-defining piece of work.

Carpenter Brut – Trilogy (2015) Synthwave’s resident rock’n’roll showman could hardly fail. Even without the eye-melting weirdness of his videos for early smashers like Turbo Killer and Roller Mobster, Carpenter Brut was clearly hell-bent on entertaining people as hard as possible. Throw in that synapse-warping imagery and an endearing and sincere connection to metal’s dark aesthetics, and he’s basically a megastar-in-waiting. Trilogy compiles his first three EPs and it’s a storm of absolute synthwave madness.

Kyle Dixon & Michael Stein – Stranger Things Vol. 1 & 2 (2016) Nothing has done more to nudge synthwave toward the mainstream than Stranger Things. If you haven’t already seen it, you’ve definitely wasted lockdown. You berk. The show’s soundtrack is plainly key to its success: purposefully evocative of movie and TV soundtracks from the ‘80s and yet oddly timeless and unsettling, it showcases a more artful and experimental side to the genre. With bonus demogorgons.

Dance With The Dead – The Shape (2018) Purveyors of a defiantly goth-friendly strain of thunderous synthwave, Dance With The Dead aimed their music squarely at the rock world from day one. Early albums like Out Of Body and Near Dark had their memorable moments, but it was The Shape that revealed DWTD to be more than just an EDM band with a taste for B-movie kitsch. Gleefully cranking up the guitars, songs like Eyes Of Madness, Riot and Diabolic were crowd-pleasing, gore-to-the-floor bangers; undeniably futuristic and forward-thinking, but demonstrably metal as fuck, too.

The best in-ear headphones: top choice wired and wireless earbuds

Best music streaming services: Spotify, TIDAL, Apple Music and others compared The best turntables for all budgets The best over-ear headphones for every budget

Glitch Black – Emergent Behavior (2018) Fans of heavy music need to take a selective approach when it comes to synthwave, a lot of which is highly formulaic and not remotely dark. But if you prefer synthwave that makes you feel like your head is being slammed through a digital wall and into some Tron-esque dystopian nightmare, Glitch Black have got you covered. From pummelling psychedelic techno (Genesis) to turbocharged car chase electro (BK-1), Emergent Behaviour is a gritty retrowave rollercoaster.

GosT – Possessor (2018) The most overtly metal-friendly of all synthwave acts, GosT proved their genre credentials with 2016’s Non Paradisi before mutating into something much more extreme and terrifying for the follow-up. Possessor still slams with that irresistible digi-disco thud, but crazed blastbeats and maxed-out electronic scree dominate, just as Satan probably intended. Last year’s Valediction album expanded GosT’s sound to include big tunes and industrial, alt-rock vibes: in contrast, Possessor is just plain nasty. Synthwave for Slayer fans.

Fixions – Sleepwatcher (2019) At this stage in synthwave’s evolution, you could throw a rubberised Walkman in pretty much any direction and be guaranteed to injure at least one mediocre exponent of the form. Meanwhile, French cyber-scamp Fixions continues to smash all-comers. Sleepwatcher is an explosive riot of jackhammer beats, insidious melodies and monstrous crescendos and a noticeably metallic sense of dynamics. Fixions mastermind Vincent Cassar also has a supremely weird black metal project called Smohalla, which explains a lot.

While you’re here, why not take advantage of our brilliant new subscribers’ offer? Get a digital pay monthly subscription for as little as £1.78 per month and enjoy the world’s best high voltage music journalism delivered direct to your device. 

Metal Hammer NewsletterSign up below to get the latest from Metal Hammer, plus exclusive special offers, direct to your inbox!

Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors

By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.

Dom Lawson Social Links Navigation

Writer

Dom Lawson has been writing for Metal Hammer and Prog for over 14 years and is extremely fond of heavy metal, progressive rock, coffee and snooker. He also contributes to The Guardian, Classic Rock, Bravewords and Blabbermouth and has previously written for Kerrang! magazine in the mid-2000s. 

More about metal hammer

"It was an honour to watch Mick Mars play our dumb songs!" How a secret meeting, some serious growing up and a Motley Crue legend helped Murderdolls reunite for their final album "It brings back lots of memories and takes me back to a place instantly of heartbreak but also teen rebellion, great times, intense times": This is the soundtrack of Bill Bailey's life

Latest

Order your limited edition Ihsahn bundle – featuring an exclusive cassette of his incredible new self-titled album See more latest ►

Most Popular

“I’ve got butter to thank and I’ve eaten plenty since!”: John Lydon on how doing a TV ad for butter helped turn his career around By Niall Doherty18 February 2024

“I tried for years to find this magical tone and I finally just gave up”: Tom Morello’s guide to being a better guitaristBy Niall Doherty18 February 2024

“We were inspired by the Brits at the start, then the British media forced us to become a different type of band. Made and broken in the UK, you could say”: The prog credentials of StyxBy Malcolm Dome18 February 2024

“My girlfriend asked if it was easy to write a song and I said, ‘It’s very easy, I’ll write one now’”: Mike Scott on the making of The Waterboys classic The Whole Of The Moon By Niall Doherty17 February 2024

"I think that Rush are the best band that have ever existed and ever will." Young UK prog rockers Square Wild state their caseBy Phil Weller17 February 2024

“We still haven’t come eye-to-eye on how things should be done”: The story of the new System Of A Down album that will (probably) never happenBy Stephen Hill17 February 2024

"I want us to be the scariest ride at the amusement park": How Lorna Shore became deathcore's defining starsBy Stephen Hill17 February 2024

The 6 prog bands John Lydon says he lovesBy Paul Travers17 February 2024

“They said, ‘We did a little thing for you, but we don’t know if it will make the album. I said, ‘You’re crazy – this is the single!’” the epic life of ‘Funky’ Claude Nobs, the man who inspired Deep Purple’s Smoke On The WaterBy Hugh Fielder17 February 2024

12 rock stars over 70 who are still delivering the goodsBy Paul Travers16 February 2024

"When I lived the 'rock star' lifestyle I have never felt so far away from myself. At times I actively hated myself and sought out my own destruction." How Frank Carter stepped back from the abyss and learned to love and be loved againBy Paul Brannigan16 February 2024

MORE FROM METAL HAMMER

1 Order your limited edition Ihsahn bundle – featuring an exclusive cassette of his incredible new self-titled album

2 "It was an honour to watch Mick Mars play our dumb songs!" How a secret meeting, some serious growing up and a Motley Crue legend helped Murderdolls reunite for their final album

3 “We still haven’t come eye-to-eye on how things should be done”: The story of the new System Of A Down album that will (probably) never happen

4 "I want us to be the scariest ride at the amusement park": How Lorna Shore became deathcore's defining stars

5 The 10 best new metal songs you need to hear right now

Music Magazines

●

Mother's Day Special: Get a £10 VEX gift card when you subscribe!

From£5

View

Louder is part of Future plc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.

About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookies policy Accessibility Statement Careers

© Future Publishing Limited Quay House, The Ambury, Bath BA1 1UA. All rights reserved. England and Wales company registration number 2008885.