https://www.musicgateway.com/blog/music-production/synthwave-music-guide

Music Gateway

Artists

Solutions for Artists

All this is included in your free Music Gateway accountIncluded in your account

Music Distribution Release to over 300 DSPs including Spotify, Apple, Amazon and more.

Sync Licensing Pitch your music to feature on TV, movies and adverts.

Music Publishing Boost your earnings by up to 50% by claiming publishing royalties.

Online Mastering Use AI mastering to make your music vibrant and really pop.

Artist Websites Build your showcase, get new fans and increase your revenue.

Playlist Submission Submit your music to premium playlists and curators.

Music Promotion Promote your music and gain access to our promo team.

More free tools

Streaming royalty calculator

Guitar tuner

Large file transfer tool

WAV to MP3 converter

Band name generator

Rap name generator

Lyric rhyme tool

Spotify mixtape creator

Spotify pre-save links

BPM tapper

ISRC finder

Online metronome

Key/BPM finder

Lyrics finder

Promotion

Promotion

Music Promotion Our leading team of professional promoters can help you from Spotify and social media optimisation to worldwide releases across TV, radio and the web.

Spotify Promotion We guarantee organic plays with through our network of influencers.

Radio promotion Our radio pluggers work with the biggest stations around the world.

Music Marketing Everything from social marketing to music videos.

Press Build your fanbase with targeted articles and press campaigns.

Vinyl Pressing Make an order or finance your vinyl production with a fan-funded pre-release campaign.

Management

Management Spotlight on

Music Management Our managers work with you on your music where you need it most.

Artist Development We focus on how to boost your career and connections.

Artist Management Connect with managers who have worked alongside huge artists.

The Academy On-demand professional e-learning courses and videos

Andrew Ash Matched with an artist manager "It's been an absolute dream ... so helpful with the release of my last single. I know so much more about the music industry and how to navigate it and felt like they put their whole heart into me and my music."

Ipek Ozsoy Artist Manager Ipek is an entertainment consultant who mentors artists at every level. As a manager and talent development specialist, she can help with branding, PR/promo, live strategy and international markets.

Josh Hicks New artist "After I won the Open Mic, I was scouted by Music Gateway... It's so helpful. Before I had my manager - I didn't know what I was doing."

Kym Musgrove Artist Manager "Music Gateway is an empowering platform that helps artists gain the knowledge they need to build long term, sustainable careers. I love seeing the transformation."

Licensing

Licensing

Artist representation Get your music on TV and movies by joining our sync agency.

License our music We can match your project with the perfect audio.

Hire a composer Bespoke compositions to compliment your media project.

Hire a music supervisor Take advantage of our award-winning music supervision team.

Pricing

Blog

Login or Join for Free or sign up with

Releasing music? Get more streams and grow your fan base. Tell me more.

Get more listens with PROMO. Discover more about PROMO.

Music Production Synthwave Music: A Guide To Synthwave

Annika Hope 18.5.2023

SHARE:

12 SHARES

The term synth wave is becoming more and more popular – the saturated aesthetic along with the stylistic music is recognized more every day, and it is not hard to see why! In this article, we will detail a brief history of the genre, as well as provide a list of the best bands to start Synthwave music with. What Is Synthwave? 

To put it simply, synthwave is a retro-inspired genre of electronic-based music, with a strong aesthetic linked to it. It draws experience from the 80’s – movies and games alike!  A relatively new term to the music industry, synthwave can be used as a genre term on its’ own, or as a sub-genre of ‘retro wave’ music. Generally, it is a microgenre of electronic music. There are also smaller music genres that fall under synthwave that have their following – outrun and vaporwave are two notable categories.  Synthwave has very recently become quite popular – thanks to Netflix’s pivotal series Stranger Things, and the 2011 movie Drive. These two pieces of media had very iconic soundtracks that have boosted the genre beyond its previous notability.  Some of the most notable synthwave songs to date are The Weeknd’s smash-hit ‘Blinding Lights’, Kavinsky’s ‘Night Call’, and ‘A Real Hero’ by band College.   A Brief History of Synthwave 

Synthwave appeared very recently – beginning in the mid-late 2000s. Since then, it has gained more traction and has become very popular! The genre was first made by French house artists and has been credited as inspired by the Grand Theft Auto: Vice City soundtrack!  Most synthwave is based on horror, sci-fi, and action film scores and TV soundtracks from the 1980s, such as Miami Vice and New York 1997. As well as this, the genre takes inspiration from the artwork and aesthetics. This includes video games from the same period, too. Specifically, the genre is heavily inspired by John Carpenter’s compositions. This includes the Blade Runner soundtrack from 1982.   In recent years, the release of Drive has led to a wide range of artists appearing that have been influenced by the iconic soundtrack. The flashy visual style of the movie has also helped to shape the genre, too. This also facilitated the creation of record companies to work with these artists: Telefuture Records and NRW Records are just two examples. The genre became popular within its own little world and has sparked playlists and dedicated YouTube channels that upload mixes and longer formats than single songs. The channel NewRetroWave on YouTube is particularly recognized for this. Characteristics of Synthwave Music 

Synthwave music holds the same characteristics across the board. The main one is that the instruments used are electronic-based – synthesizers make up the main part of most songs. Analog-style drum machine beats are coupled with deep and powerful bass lines, to complement the supersonic synth sounds. Another noticeable feature of synthwave songs is the BPM: the vast majority of tracks in this synthwave genre are between 80 and 110bpm. The fast-paced beats replicate the heart-pounding action of the films, TV, and video games that inspired the entire genre. The genre boasts its aesthetics, which are not least influenced by science and especially technology. This harks back to the 80s decade when technological advances were romanticized, and films often featured robots or dystopian cyber futures as the antagonists.  Similarly, the genre has been molded by the style of retro video games! Now, the tables have turned, and games are replicating the older visuals and making ‘retro’ themed games. Some fantastic synthwave-esque soundtracks can be found in the games Hotline Miami, Far Cry 3: Blood Dragon, and Crypt of the Necrodancer. Synthwave itself has a sort of ethos. It embodies the feeling of summer, particularly in almost tropical USA – think Florida, or Long Beach in California. A picture of the feeling and sounds of vintage arcades, movie theatres down to sunsets across the beaches, melt through to listener’s minds. Lyrics or sound clips in the songs, if there are any, sometimes reflect this – for instance in the song Roller Skating by MicroMatscenes. Sub-Genres Of Synthwave Music 

Outrun Outrun can be simply another term for synthwave. However, it is generally seen as a sub-genre. The name came from the 1986 game, Out Run, as the soundtrack inspired many artists. The game also had a choice of which music the player listened to. It became a subgenre with heavy 80s influences and more instrumental songs. The songs in this genre resemble the tracks from the time. Recommended artist: Lazerhawk Dreamwave As the name may suggest, Dreamwave is a sub-genre that focuses on the chilled-out side of the synthwave scale. The songs in this category are atmospheric and almost relaxing. Heavily reverb-soaked elements come into play here! Recommended artist: Downtown Binary Darksynth & Dark Synthwave Sometimes known as ‘Horror Synth’, darkwave is on the other end of the spectrum to Dreamwave. Pioneered by Perturbator and Carpenter Brut in the early 2010s, the genre relies on heavy bass and fast tempos – bordering on metal and industrial styles of music. It’s used This type of music has been used for various video games and crosses the gap between metal and synth wave. It’s used in horror films a lot and science fiction, such as Tangerine Dream & Power Glove. Recommended artist: Carpenter Brut Chillwave Chillwave, sometimes known as Dreampop, is a more mellow type of synthwave. Featuring smoother vocals over moderate-tempo beats. Chillwave attempts to capture the feeling of 80s synthwave electropop songs. The genre was created almost completely by the internet, and was originally conceived as a joke! Recommended artist: Washed Out 5 Of The Best Synthwave Artists 

Here is a quick list of five recommended artists to get into the genre, spanning some of the sub-categories, too. Look out for our list of the best synthwave songs coming soon! Kavinsky French musician Kavinsky is one of the longest-running synthwave artists. Beginning in 2005, his career has molded the genre. Having toured with the likes of Justice, he is probably the most popular maker of synthwave tunes. Miami Nights 84 A pioneer of the outrun genre formed in 2010, Michael Glover (behind Miami Nights 1984) helped shape synthwave into what it is today. His albums have all been hits and he has become a recognized cornerstone of the genre. Shikimo Shikimo, the moniker of Ryan Unash, is a passion project that was created from a love of Basshunter in the early 2010s. His songs are inspired by space, landscapes, and weather. His 2018 release, ‘Off-World’, was named the best synth-ambient project of the decade! M83 There is some debate as to whether M83 is a synthwave band or not, but a lot of their tracks fall into the correct categories – most notably ‘Midnight City’. Despite being active for many years, the band remains fairly unknown. Perturbator Another notable French artist is Perturbator. Signed to the Blood Music label, he produces a darker synthwave with clear influences from his background in black metal. His main influences are cyberpunk and anime culture. That Was Our Synthwave Guide!  Overall, synth-wave has become a very popular and recognizable genre. We as humans are constantly yearning for the past – especially the vibrant and exciting times in the 1980s. The media produced in that era can never be truly replicated, but synthwave and its’ spin-off genres do an incredible job of capturing the essence of the bygone era. With artists that span all moods from party time to relaxing atmospheres, to action-packed gaming, it is easy to see why synthwave is such a well-liked genre. Do you enjoy synthwave music? Don’t forget to share this article across your socials, and tag us @musicgateway!

RELATED SERVICE

SHARE THIS ARTICLE:

12 SHARES

Related posts

Music Production

13.2.2024

FairSound: Your Gateway to Fan-Funded Vinyl Pressing

In the bustling world of music, finding innovative ways to connect with fans while managing costs can be a daunting task for artists. Enter FairSound, a...

Music Production

27.10.2023

10 Mistakes Music Producers Make and How to Fix Them

Producers play an instrumental role in shaping today’s music. While they operate behind the scenes, their influence can be as profound as the most...

Music Production

2.10.2023

909 Meaning In Music

In the realm of music, certain numbers hold a special place in the hearts of artists and enthusiasts. One such number is 909, which carries a unique and...

Categories

Music Industry TV and Film Advertising and Media Gaming Industry

All Music Industry Artist Interviews Best Music Spotlight Case Studies How To Music News Music Opportunities

All TV and Film News and Features How To Case Studies

All Advertising and Media News and Features How To Case Studies

All Gaming Industry News and Features How To Case Studies

Share:

Get started today Join for Free

USEFUL LINKS

Artist Development

Band Name Generator

Blog

BPM Tapper

Case Studies

Film Investors

Free Artist / Band Showcase Page

Free Large File Transfer

Free Mastering

Free Music Tools

Free Pre-Save Links

Gifts For Musicians

Online Guitar Tuner

Online Metronome

History of Music

ISRC Finder

Jobs Board

Key/BPM finder

Login

Lyrics finder

Lyric Rhyme Tool

Music Genres Map

Music Industry Events Calendar

Music Industry Jargon Buster

Music Industry Newsletter

Music Industry Resources

Network User Login

Partners

Pricing

Radio Stations Worldwide

Rap Name Generator

Sign Up

Spotify Discover Music

Spotify Mixtape Creator

Streaming Royalties Calculator

Wav to MP3 Converter

Vinyl Pressing

FEATURES

Cloud Storage For Creatives

Cover Song Licensing

Features Overview

For Music Licensing & Search

Live and Loud Sessions

Manage Demo Submissions

Music Distribution

Music Industry Jobs

Music Industry Playlists

Music Marketing

Music Promotion

Music PR & Press

Music Sync Licensing

Private Network

Spotify Promotion

Spotify Playlist Submission

Submit Your Music Demos

TikTok Promotion

Unsigned Artists & Bands

MUSIC GATEWAY

Advertising Agencies

Artist Management

Cast a movie

Creative Industry Roles

Curators

Film Distribution

Film Investment

Film Budget

Film Marketing

Games Publishers

Indie Bands

Independent Filmmakers

Musician

Music Artists

Music Composer

Ignite Music Fund

Music Industry Partners

Music Management

Music Producer

Music Publishing

Music Sales Representatives Jobs

Music Supervision

Production Music Library

Radio Stations

Radio Promotion

Record Labels

Recording Studios

Songwriter

Sync Sessions

The Academy

CONTACT

About Us

Support

Contact

Terms and Conditions

Privacy Policy

Acceptable Use Policy

Reporting Infringements

+44 (0) 20 4509 9090 (UK)

+1 (833) 644 1108 (USA)

[email protected]

© 2024 Music Gateway Ltd Registered & Trademarked in the United Kingdom.